JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
I said I would take process
seriously, and
I did. I chose a serious man and
an exemplary
judge.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
appoints federal
Judge Merrick Garland to the
Supreme Court,
and Republicans double down on
their pledge
to block the nominee.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Wednesday: As
the GOP field narrows, Ted Cruz
and John Kasich
brand themselves as the
alternative to Donald
Trump. But is it too late?
JUDY WOODRUFF: And an exclusive
report on
the details surrounding why Army
Sergeant
Bowe Bergdahl walked off his
post in Afghanistan
in 2009.
EUGENE FIDELL, Attorney for Bowe
Bergdahl:
Feeling that there was no
alternative way
to get his concerns about
circumstances in
the unit and the lack of
leadership in the
unit, Sergeant Bergdahl
concluded that he
had to get to a higher echelon.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: The battle was
officially joined
today over the vacancy on the
U.S. Supreme
Court. The president formally
opened the fray,
nominating the head of the
federal appeals
court for the District of
Columbia.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Today, I am nominating chief
Judge Merrick
Brian Garland to join the
Supreme Court.
GWEN IFILL: The announcement was
greeted with
applause in the Rose Garden as
the president
hailed his nominee.
BARACK OBAMA: Judge Garland has
earned a track
record of building consensus as
a thoughtful,
fair-minded judge who follows
the law. He's
shown a rare ability to bring
together odd
couples, assemble unlikely
coalitions, persuade
colleagues with wide-ranging
judicial philosophies
to sign onto his opinions.
GWEN IFILL: That was calculated
to make the
case that Senate Republicans
should at least
give Garland a chance.
BARACK OBAMA: To suggest that
someone as qualified
and respected as Merrick Garland
doesn't even
deserve a hearing, let alone an
up-or-down
vote, to join an institution as
important
as our Supreme Court, when
two-thirds of Americans
believe otherwise, that would be
unprecedented.
JUDGE MERRICK GARLAND, U.S.
Supreme Court
Nominee: This is the greatest
honor of my
life.
GWEN IFILL: The judge choked
back tears as
he thanked the president, and he
seemed to
make his own appeal.
JUDGE MERRICK GARLAND: Fidelity
to the Constitution
and the law has been the
cornerstone of my
professional life, and it's the
hallmark of
the kind of judge I have tried
to be for the
past 18 years. If the Senate
sees fit to confirm
me to the position for which I
have been nominated
today, I promise to continue on
that course.
GWEN IFILL: Garland is 63. He
left private
practice for the Justice
Department in 1993,
and oversaw its response to the
Oklahoma City
bombing. President Clinton then
nominated
him to the D.C. Circuit Court of
Appeals.
He was confirmed in 1997.
At the time, he drew praise from
the likes
of Republican Orrin Hatch, then
chair of the
Senate Judiciary Committee.
SEN. ORRIN HATCH (R), Utah: He
belongs on
the court. And I believe he is
not only a
fine nominee, but is as good as
Republicans
can expect from this
administration. In fact,
I would place him at the top of
the list.
GWEN IFILL: That was then. This
is now.
Now Garland is being nominated
to replace
conservative Justice Antonin
Scalia, who died
last month. Republicans fear
that confirming
him to the high court would
create a liberal
majority.
So, within minutes of the
president's announcement,
Senate Majority Leader Mitch
McConnell went
to the Senate floor to double
down on his
pledge to deny the president as
much as a
hearing on his nominee.
SEN. MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY),
Majority Leader:
The decision the Senate
announced weeks ago
remains about a principle and
not a person,
about a principle, and not a
person. It seems
clear that President Obama made
this nomination
not, not with the intent of
seeing the nominee
confirmed, but in order to
politicize it for
purposes of the election.
GWEN IFILL: On the presidential
campaign trail,
Republicans Ted Cruz and John
Kasich seconded
that notion, while Democrats
Hillary Clinton
and Bernie Sanders issued
statements of support
for Garland.
Still, that sentiment was far
from universal,
even among the president's own
party. Civil
rights activists and
progressives wanted an
African-American woman or
another minority
nominee, possibly Indian-born
federal appeals
Judge Sri Srinivasan.
In a "NewsHour" interview today,
White House
senior adviser Valerie Jarrett
explained the
president's thinking.
VALERIE JARRETT, Senior
Presidential Adviser:
He's nominated two women to the
court before,
one of them a Latino woman, so
obviously he
believes there are lots of
people who are
qualified. The question isn't,
is the person
qualified? The question is, who
is the best
person for it?
In this instance, he made the
judgment that
that would be the chief judge.
GWEN IFILL: The White House says
Judge Garland
began making calls to senators
this afternoon,
and will go to Capitol Hill
tomorrow for meet-and-greets.
And in spite of the pushback,
several Republicans
have said they may meet with, if
not vote
for him.
We will have a closer look at
Judge Garland
and hear from both sides in the
Senate after
the news summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: Republican
Donald Trump warned against
trying to deny
him the party's presidential
nomination if
it comes down to a contested
convention. Trump
and Democrat Hillary Clinton
padded their
delegate leads in Tuesday's
primaries, and
their rivals became even longer
shots. We
will have a full report later in
the program.
GWEN IFILL: The Federal Reserve
decided to
keep short-term interest rates
unchanged today.
Policy-makers at the Central
Bank said the
economy is growing, but still
faces risks
from abroad.
Fed Chair Janet Yellen
underscored that two
rate hikes are still possible
this year, depending
on economic growth.
JANET YELLEN, Federal Reserve
Chair: If events
continue to unfold in that way,
we are likely
to gradually raise rates over
time. Again,
that's not fixed in stone. We
will watch how
the economy behaves. We're
prepared to respond
if things transpire differently.
GWEN IFILL: The fed raised it's
key rate in
December after years at a record
low.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street had
been lower
before the Fed's announcement,
but stocks
rose on the news. The Dow Jones
industrial
average gained 74 points to
close at 17325.
The Nasdaq rose 35, and the S&P
500 added
11.
GWEN IFILL: The state Supreme
Court in Ohio
gave the green light today for
officials to
execute a convicted killer
again. They tried
and failed in 2009 to put Romell
Broom to
death by lethal injection. After
two hours
and 18 attempts, the
executioners could not
find a vein. The court today
rejected Broom's
argument that, under double
jeopardy, the
state gets only one try.
JUDY WOODRUFF: An American
tourist arrested
in North Korea was sentenced
today to 15 years
of hard labor. Otto Warmbier is
a 21-year-old
student at the University of
Virginia. He
was charged with subversion
after confessing
he tried to steal a propaganda
banner. The
verdict came down after just an
hour in court,
where Warmbier offered a tearful
plea to be
forgiven and sent home.
OTTO WARMBIER, American Student:
My brother
and my sister need me. I beg
that you see
that I am only human, how I have
made the
worse mistake of my life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.S. State
Department called
the sentence unduly harsh. And
in a separate
development, President Obama
ordered new sanctions
against the North over its
recent nuclear
and missile tests.
GWEN IFILL: In Nigeria, two
women blew themselves
up at a mosque, killing at least
24 people
and wounding 18. It happened in
Maiduguri
during dawn prayers. One
attacker struck inside
the mosque. The second targeted
worshipers
trying to escape. Officials
suspect Boko Haram,
the militants trying to carve
out their own
Islamic State.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A manhunt is
under way in Brussels
for two suspects with possible
ties to last
year's Paris attacks. They fled
last night
after a police raid turned into
a shoot-out.
An Algerian man was killed, and
investigators
uncovered a trove of weapons and
ammunition.
They also found an Islamic State
flag. The
November shootings in Paris left
130 dead.
And, today, French police
arrested four people
suspected of planning a new
attack.
GWEN IFILL: Brazil's president
and her predecessor
moved today to stay ahead of a
growing corruption
scandal. Former President Luiz
Inacio Lula
da Silva was named chief of
staff, with legal
protections that could keep him
out of jail.
He's also expected to help
President Dilma
Rousseff fight to fend off
impeachment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And with
apologies to Disneyland,
Denmark is now officially the
happiest place
on earth. The United Nations
says so in a
new survey of countries based on
health data,
job security rates and other
social and political
factors. The United States
ranked 13th. Burundi
came in last.
GWEN IFILL: I'm happy enough.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I guess 13th is
OK.
GWEN IFILL: Still to come on the
"NewsHour"
senators weigh in on President
Obama's Supreme
Court nominee; Donald Trump and
Hillary Clinton's
improved path to the White
House; an exclusive
report on Army Sergeant Bowe
Bergdahl; and
much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: If confirmed,
he'd become the
third justice appointed to the
Supreme Court
by President Obama. So, who is
Merrick Garland?
To answer that question, we turn
to Seth Waxman.
He was the U.S. solicitor
general under President
Clinton, in charge of that
administration's
cases before the Supreme Court.
He now focuses
on Supreme Court litigation in
private practice.
And Marcia Coyle, chief
Washington correspondent
for "The National Law Journal"
and a "NewsHour"
regular.
And welcome to you both.
So, Seth Waxman, you have known
Merrick Garland
since you were in college
together. What should
we know about him?
SETH WAXMAN, Former U.S.
Solicitor General:
Merrick Garland is a grand slam
nominee for
the Supreme Court, not just a
home run, but
a grand slam nominee.
He has every qualification to be
a truly great
Supreme Court justice. He is --
he has a very
keen intellect. He thinks,
writes and speaks
very clearly. He is the
consummate collegial
human being in his personal life
and in his
professional life. He is a
terrific, terrific,
and always has been a terrific
listener to
other people's views.
He decides everything very
deliberately. He
is a very careful person, a very
considerate
person. I doubt very much that
there is anybody
who has known Merrick Garland
personally or
has been a professional
colleague or adversary
of his that wouldn't say that
this man has
all the qualifications to be an
important
jurist and a valued colleague
for the other
Supreme Court justices, whatever
their jurisprudential
views.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's quite an
endorsement.
Marcia Coyle, where does he fit
on the ideological
spectrum?
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal":
Well, I think his reputation is
as a centrist.
And he has that reputation
because you can't
peg him as always liberal or
always conservative.
He is not, on the D.C. Circuit,
always pro-government
when agency cases come before
him. He's not
always pro-environmentalist, or
pro-business.
He is in the middle. So, on
those types of
cases that the D.C. Circuit gets
-- and that
court has a very heavy, steady
diet of federal
regulatory cases -- he is a
centrist.
What we don't know is how he
might rule in
sort of the culture war issues
that currently
are now before the Supreme
Court, because
he hasn't had those types of
issues.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Because those are
the type
cases that presumably don't come
up.
MARCIA COYLE: That's right,
Judy.
But it is fair to say that
President Obama
wouldn't have nominated someone
like Justice
Scalia, for example. He
nominated Merrick
Garland because at least he sees
in Merrick
Garland, aside from his really
unassailable
qualifications, someone who
shares a similar
approach to the law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What would you
add to that,
Seth Waxman?
SETH WAXMAN: You know, I think
Merrick has
a reputation for being a
centrist, a prudent
jurist.
And I want to say that, you
know, since we
were in college together,
Merrick has had
the deserved reputation for
being a careful,
deliberate, prudent person. I
don't mean to
say that he's timid. He makes
decisions, and
he makes them when they have to
be made, and
he makes difficult decisions,
but he doesn't
decide anything, he doesn't
decide things
in his -- with the exception of
his decision
to marry Lynn, he doesn't decide
things based
on emotion.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which he
mentioned today at
the...
(CROSSTALK)
SETH WAXMAN: And he doesn't make
decisions
based on the received wisdom of
other people.
He doesn't say, oh, well, all
these people
that I respect think this, so I
should think
that.
You know, Merrick goes back to
first principles
when deciding things like which
ski run to
take when we're skiing together.
He is a careful,
prudent person. And, you know,
honestly, in
the 45 years we have known each
other, I don't
think that we have ever had a
political discussion.
Nobody would call me politically
astute, and
nobody would call Merrick
politically active.
I honestly can say I don't know
what his views
are on some of these hot-button
issues. I
think the president's decision
to nominate
him reflects a determination to
make an unassailable,
merits nomination.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marcia, how does
this -- you
were telling -- you were saying
to us earlier
this is kind of an unprecedented
situation,
where the Senate is not only
saying we're
not going to hold hearings. Many
of the Republicans
are saying, we don't even want
to meet with
him.
MARCIA COYLE: Yes, that's true.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How does this
compare with
other nominations?
MARCIA COYLE: Well, it doesn't
compare with
any in my past, and I have
covered confirmation
hearings and nominations since
the Robert
Bork hearings in 1987.
Even as controversial as Robert
Bork was,
the Senate did have a hearing.
To say they
-- some -- some senators to say
they wouldn't
even meet Judge Garland, I
think, is unprecedented,
and, you know, personally, a
little disrespectful.
This is a presidential
nomination to the U.S.
Supreme Court.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Seth Waxman,
finally, you know,
it's already being said that
Merrick Garland
is a sacrificial lamb, that,
given the disposition
of the Senate majority, that he
isn't going
to get a hearing, that his name
is being put
out there and it's going
nowhere. Is he prepared
-- knowing him, is he prepared
to be just
that?
SETH WAXMAN: Well, I should say
that, as close
as I feel to Merrick, I haven't
spoken to
him since Justice Scalia passed
away. We haven't
had a conversation on this.
But, based on what I know about
him, I can
tell you that he is the kind of
person who
I think feels tremendously
honored to have
been nominated, to have been
even considered
by the president. And he doesn't
-- he's not
the kind of person who holds a
grudge or gets
angry or ever displays anger.
If it turns out that he's not
given a fair,
respectful treatment by the
Senate, it would
be regrettable for the nation,
but he will
go on being a terrific jurist as
the chief
judge of the D.C. Circuit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Seth Waxman,
Marcia Coyle,
we thank you both.
SETH WAXMAN: Thank you.
MARCIA COYLE: Thank you, Judy.
GWEN IFILL: Now that the
president has announced
his nomination for the Supreme
Court vacancy,
the responsibility falls
squarely on the Senate
to act or perhaps, in this case,
not to act.
I spoke a short time ago to two
members of
the Senate Judiciary Committee,
first, Republican
Senator Orrin Hatch of Utah.
Welcome, Senator.
As you probably are aware,
several of your
Republican colleagues have said
they at least
plan to meet with Judge Merrick
Garland. Do
you plan to?
SEN. ORRIN HATCH (R), Utah:
We're friends.
I would be happy to meet with
him any time,
but it isn't going to change the
viewpoint.
And the viewpoint is, is that we
ought to
put this off until the next
election, or until
after the election, so that it's
fair to both
sides and we get it out of this
what really
-- what really is a toxic
presidential election
process. It's just terrible.
GWEN IFILL: So, you're saying if
this were
not a toxic election process, it
would be
OK for any president to be able
to make his
nominee?
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: Well, it
depends.
It depends on -- you know, I
don't know what's
going to happen after this
election, but putting
it off until after the election
seems to me
to be a wise thing to do. It
will bring people
together better than just trying
to ram it
through this time.
GWEN IFILL: Does it seem right
to you that
this should be about the
election process,
rather than about the quality of
the nominee?
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: Yes, look, the
quality of
the nominee isn't an issue. The
person is
not an issue.
What is an issue is, should we
do this during
this toxic presidential election
process?
Because you have seen over the
recent years
-- and the Democrats started
this when they
really destroyed Bork, who was
one of the
all-time great legal minds.
GWEN IFILL: So you're saying --
let me just
get this right -- that, all
things being equal,
if this were not an election
year, but it
was still this president making
the nomination,
knowing what you know about
Merrick Garland,
you could conceive of supporting
him?
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: Well, I didn't
say that.
I'm saying that, you know, we
have only had
a very few times in history
where somebody
has been put up during a
presidential election
year.
1916 was the last effective
time, and that's
when Chief Justice Charles Evans
Hughes decided
to leave the court and run for
president.
We had one other time when Judge
Kennedy was
confirmed after -- during a
presidential year,
but he was nominated in the year
before, and
that only came after the toxic,
you know,
Bork proceedings, where his
reputation was
really attacked viciously by
Democrats.
So -- and I can tell you this.
If the table
were turned and this was -- and
the Democrats
are in charge, I guarantee you
-- or excuse
me -- Republicans had the
presidency, I guarantee
you the Democrats wouldn't do
anything different
from what the Republicans are
doing.
And I think it's only right.
GWEN IFILL: So, since so much of
the toxicity,
as you describe it, in this
election has happened
on the Republican side of the
competition,
do you worry that if a Democrat
were elected
president, you may have missed a
chance to
at least hear -- hold a hearing
for someone
you who might actually find more
acceptable
than a Democrat, the next
Democrat might nominate?
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: Well, I think
it's been
toxic on both sides, and it's
going to get
worse, as far as I can see. So,
you know,
the Democrat election hasn't
been a walk in
the park either.
But I will tell you one thing
I'm tired of.
And that is, when it comes to
the Supreme
Court, we should all be
venerating that court
and venerating the people on it.
And to put
them through -- put even a good
candidate
through this toxic process
during a presidential
election, which really hasn't
been done before
in this way, I think, is a
tremendous -- would
be a tremendous mistake.
And Republicans just aren't
going to do that.
Neither would Democrats. If the
position was
changed and it was the other way
around, the
Democrats wouldn't be going
ahead either.
GWEN IFILL: So, what happens
next? We just
go through the motions for a
couple months?
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: Well, I think
-- I think
people ought to start accepting
that the Republicans
are not going to do this at this
time, in
this presidential election.
But there will come a time when
it will have
to be done, regardless of who is
president.
And, yes, to answer your
question, yes, I
would prefer having a Republican
president,
because I think you will get
better judges.
But, you know, if Mrs. Clinton
is elected,
she's certainly going to be able
to appoint
the judges that she thinks are
the better
type of judges. And they will be
much more
liberal than the judges and
certainly justices
that the Republicans would
promote.
GWEN IFILL: Well, I suppose
that's the gamble
then.
Senator Orrin Hatch of Utah,
thank you very
much.
SEN. ORRIN HATCH: Well, nice to
be with you.
GWEN IFILL: Now we turn to a
Democrat on the
Senate Judiciary Committee,
Senator Al Franken
of Minnesota.
Senator, what do you make of the
nominee that
was put forward this morning,
and, also, the
Republican reaction to him
already?
SEN. AL FRANKEN (D), Minnesota:
Well, I think
he was a great choice.
I have been hearing about Judge
Garland for
a long time. He, I know, was in
the running
for Justice Kagan's seat, and I
think maybe
Sotomayor's. I have heard great
things about
him from a number of friends,
including from
Orrin Hatch, my Republican
colleague from
Utah, who is on the Judiciary
Committee.
I think that this was a great
nominee because
he's a consensus-builder. He's
widely respected.
And I think that my Republican
colleagues
who are taking a very unpopular
position with
the American people, which was
not to meet
with, not to give a hearing to
the president's
nomination, not to do the job
that's there
in the Constitution for us to
do, to provide
advice and consent, I think
they're going
to back off of that, and I think
we're going
to have a hearing and a vote on
Judge Garland.
GWEN IFILL: What indication do
you have that
that's going to happen? They
have been as
tough and firmer today, if
anything, about
their -- Senator McConnell has,
even Senator
Hatch has -- that this is not
going to happen.
How do you get around that?
SEN. AL FRANKEN: Well, for
example, the chairman
of the committee, Chairman
Grassley, has said
that he wouldn't meet with the
-- any nominee,
and, today, he announced that he
was going
to have a phone call with Judge
Garland to
discuss a meeting.
I don't think you announce that
you're calling
-- having a phone call to
discuss a meeting
unless you're going to have a
meeting. So
it feels like they're softening.
And I know
that there are seven meetings
scheduled from
Republican senators, including
someone as
conservative as Senator Inhofe.
I think that has to do with the
unbelievably
stellar job that Judge Garland
did on the
Oklahoma City bombing.
GWEN IFILL: Well, I certainly
don't have to
tell that you saying that you're
open to a
meeting is not saying that
you're opening
to a hearing or saying that
to bringing it to a vote on the
floor of the
Senate.
SEN. AL FRANKEN: I'm -- I'm
aware of that.
What I was saying is, it
represents a softening
of their position. It represents
movement
that happened in the first hours
after he
announced this nomination. So,
that seems
to be movement in the right
direction.
And I think, you know, the
American people
have spoken pretty clearly in
polls, about
2-1, saying this is a -- this is
a lousy idea
for Republicans not to do what's
in the Constitution,
our responsibility in the
Constitution, which
is provide advice and consent,
which we have
been doing through hearings
since 1916. They
refuse to have a hearing, and
they refuse
to vote on this at their peril.
GWEN IFILL: Senator Franken,
you're a pretty
liberal guy. What do you say to
progressives
who think the president missed
an opportunity
to make a more liberal pick?
SEN. AL FRANKEN: I think the
president made
a wise pick.
I -- the White House reached out
to Democrats
on the Judiciary Committee,
asked us what
kind of nominee we'd like to
see. I said,
I want somebody who, at the end
of the hearings,
the American people will say, "I
want nine
of those to be the Supreme
Court. That's what
I would like. I would like nine
of those."
And it seems to me, from
everything I know
and I have heard about Judge
Garland, that
you would want nine of those.
GWEN IFILL: Senator Al Franken,
Democrat of
Minnesota, thank you very much.
SEN. AL FRANKEN: Thank you,
Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the latest on
the presidential
race of 2016.
Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump
scored big
wins in Tuesday's voting, and
hold narrow
leads in Missouri, where the
races have not
yet been called. But their
remaining challengers
are soldiering on.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
Isn't it interesting, for the
first time,
people are getting to see my
name, my face,
and hear my message, because I
labored in
obscurity?
(APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republican
Governor John Kasich
got right back to campaigning
this morning,
hoping for a new lease on
political life,
after claiming his first win in
his own home
state, Ohio.
AUDIENCE: Kasich! Kasich!
Kasich!
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kasich's victory
was the only
loss last night for Donald
Trump. But the
New York billionaire steamrolled
to victories
in Florida, North Carolina, and
Illinois.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
We're going to go forward, and
we're going
to win. But, more importantly,
to win for the country. We're
going to win,
win, win, and we're not
stopping.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Counting results
from Missouri,
Trump now has 673 delegates,
well ahead of
the competition, and more than
half what's
needed to win the GOP
nomination.
On CNN this morning, Trump
warned of possible
trouble if he keeps building
strength and
then is blocked by fellow
Republicans.
DONALD TRUMP: I think we will
win before getting
to the convention, but I can
tell you, if
we didn't, and if we're 20 votes
short or
if we're 100 short, and we're at
1,100 and
somebody else is at 500 or 400,
because we're
way ahead of everybody, I don't
think you
can say that we don't get it
automatically.
I think it would be -- I think
you would have
riots.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Texas Senator Ted
Cruz is Trump's
closest rival, with 411
delegates, despite
his failure to come in first
anywhere on Tuesday.
With Florida Senator Marco Rubio
dropping
out last night, Cruz insisted
it's now a two-man
race.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Only two campaigns have a
plausible path to
the nomination, ours and Donald
Trump's. Only
one campaign has beaten Donald
Trump over
and over and over again.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former House
Speaker John Boehner
had said he might back his own
successor,
Paul Ryan, for president at the
GOP Convention.
But Ryan said today he wouldn't
accept the
nomination.
DONALD TRUMP: But I think we
have had enough.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the meantime,
FOX News canceled
a debate scheduled for next
Monday, after
first Trump and then Kasich said
they wouldn't
attend.
On the Democratic side, Hillary
Clinton is
moving on after a sweep of wins
in Florida,
Illinois, North Carolina, and
Ohio last night.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
This is another Super Tuesday
for our campaign.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: We are
moving closer
to securing the Democratic Party
nomination
and winning this election in
November.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The contests,
including still-uncalled
Missouri, brought her delegate
count to 1,606,
more than two-thirds of what is
needed for
the Democratic nomination. That
puts her far
ahead of Bernie Sanders, who has
851.
The candidates now turn toward
contests in
three Western states next
Tuesday, Arizona,
Utah and Idaho.
For more of last night's results
and what's
ahead this campaign cycle we
turn to Susan
Page, Washington bureau chief
for USA Today,
and Reid Wilson, chief political
correspondent
for The Morning Consult.
And welcome back to both of you.
So, let's start by talking about
the Democrats.
Susan, let's look at -- you have
looked at
these exit polls last night,
what the voters
were saying. Are there messages
there for
Hillary Clinton? What should she
take away
from what happened yesterday?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today:
Hillary Clinton continues to
have challenges
we have seen all along in this
election cycle.
She does very poorly among
voters under 30.
Sanders is carrying them by
about 7-1. And
she scores poorly on the issue
of, is she
honest and trustworthy? This is
actually a
challenge that she shares with
Donald Trump.
And there are things that she
needs to address.
On the other hand, she probably
has -- went
for five for five, if Missouri
goes the way
it seems to be going. That's a
big victory,
especially after that surprise
defeat in Michigan
a week ago, when it looked like
Sanders might
be coming from behind in those
-- in a big
Midwestern state. That didn't
prove to be
the case in Ohio.
So, overall, I think the message
for Hillary
Clinton is, she is on the verge
of having
an unstoppable lead in getting
the number
of delegates she will need to
become the first
woman ever nominated by a major
party for
president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Reid, what else
do you see
in what the results were
yesterday?
REID WILSON, Morning Consult:
Susan makes
a good point about Donald
Trump's honest and
trustworthy problem here.
We have got two party nomination
contests
that are nearing an end. Donald
Trump has
a plausible path to the
Republican nomination.
Ted Cruz's is much more
troubling. But if
we have got a Donald Trump vs.
Hillary Clinton
general election, both
candidates are going
to start with extremely high
negative ratings,
and honest and trustworthy
questions from
within their own party.
It's not just Democrats who
don't like Trump.
It's Republicans, too, who have
big questions
about him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But on the
Democratic side,
what -- can you read something
into this?
We keep hearing they believe
that many voters
say she is not honest and
trustworthy. But
what is that getting at? What
are they saying?
REID WILSON: Well, Democrats are
looking,
by and large, for a candidate
who can win
in November.
And when you ask them which
candidate is most
electable, which candidate has
the experience
to be president, Hillary Clinton
wins by leaps
and bounds among those
candidates, as widely
as Bernie Sanders does among
younger voters,
who are his biggest supporters.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What were you
going to add?
SUSAN PAGE: I was going to say,
Hillary Clinton
has another problem in this FBI
investigation
into her use of a private e-mail
server when
she was secretary of state.
And I think that bothers some
voters and people
are waiting to see, what does
the FBI conclude?
Could she even be indicted? She
says that's
not a possibility. But that's
the one thing
that gives people some pause.
And it gives
the Democrats some chills as
they go toward
-- down the path of making her
the all-but-certain
nominee.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, as we
showed, she's way
ahead in delegates, Reid, but
Bernie Sanders
is still in the race. He didn't
do very well
yesterday. But he says he's not
going away.
But what is his role at this
point?
REID WILSON: Well, Bernie
Sanders has the
money to continue on. He has got
the tens
of millions of dollars. He's
been very successful
at raising money, especially
from small-dollar
donors.
He spent last night in Arizona,
which, as
we have said, is the next
contest down the
road, and barely mentioned
during his speech
last night that voting had
happened anywhere
else.
Sanders' role, though, is still
to try to
nudge the party to the left. And
he has been
successful in that, in moving
Hillary Clinton
to the left on a number of key
issues over
the last couple of months.
Clinton, though,
has signaled that she's sort of
wrapping up
the Democratic nomination, maybe
in her own
head, ready to move on to a
general.
She spent all of her victory
speech last night
talking about Donald Trump, not
about Bernie
Sanders.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Susan, how much
does Hillary
Clinton have to continue to
contend with Bernie
Sanders?
SUSAN PAGE: Well, last night,
she said, congratulations
on your vigorous campaign, and
then she ignored
him. She turned entirely to
Donald Trump.
But the fact is, she probably
won't get over
the finish line maybe until
early June. And
Bernie Sanders will be in this
race. Hillary
Clinton has a hard argument to
make that he
needs to get out, because, you
know what,
eight years ago, Barack Obama
was making the
same argument to her, and she
stayed in until
the very end.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, well,
let's talk
about -- some more about the
Republicans,
Reid.
Donald Trump didn't win every
state. John
Kasich won his home state, his
first win,
in Ohio. But where does Trump
sit right now
on the road to the nomination?
REID WILSON: He sits better than
anybody else
does by a long shot. He grew his
lead over
Ted Cruz, his nearest
competitor, by nearly
200 pledge delegates, once all
the final numbers
are sussed out from last night.
And the other two candidates are
having to
explain more and more how their
path forward
exists. John Kasich has won so
few delegates,
that it's almost mathematically
impossible
for him to get to a nomination.
On the other hand, Ted Cruz is
trying to force
Kasich out of the race. There's
an argument
to be made, though, that if the
two of them
focus on their core voters, very
conservative
voters for Ted Cruz, more
moderate, centrist
voters for John Kasich, that
that is the only
path forward for both of them by
denying Donald
Trump a majority at the
convention in Cleveland.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's
interesting, Susan,
because you also hear the
argument that, if
one of them drops out, it
becomes a one-on-one,
and thus a better chance to
stand up to Donald
Trump.
SUSAN PAGE: I know that the
Trump people wanted
to win in Ohio, and, obviously,
that would
have been a big victory. But the
fact is,
you can make the argument that
this is helpful
to Donald Trump.
Now, John Kasich is in this
race. It denies
Ted Cruz what he's wanted for so
long, which
is to go head to head against
Donald Trump.
I think it makes this -- I think
it makes
things easier for Trump in a
way. Trump now
needs to get, what, about 55
percent, of the
remaining convention delegates.
That is probably a doable number
in a three-person
race, especially when where John
Kasich, it's
really hard to see the state
that he wins.
I don't think John Kasich is
likely to meet
the rule that allows him to be
nominated at
the convention. You have to have
a majority
of delegates in eight states.
He now has one. Only Donald
Trump has gotten
over the margin only -- over
that hurdle of
being -- having a majority of
delegates in
eight states. So, Kasich, you
know, he goes
to Pennsylvania today.
Pennsylvania doesn't
even vote for a month. There's a
long interval
here where I think Donald Trump
will be getting
convention delegates and John
Kasich won't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That's
interesting about the
eight states. I think a lot of
people have
not focused on that.
But given that sort of
interregnum period
we're going into when there are
not very many
contests, what does Donald Trump
need to be
doing? You mentioned some of the
problems
he still has with voters'
perceptions of him.
REID WILSON: Well, I mean, what
he needs to
be doing is probably the
opposite of what
he will do.
He has been rewriting the
playbook of how
a modern presidential campaign
has been operating
for the longest time. I think
what he needs
to do is to begin convincing
voters, especially
the centrists and independents
who are going
to decide this election, that he
is, in fact,
presidential, that he can do
something other
than take shots at his opponents
or take shots
at the media or Megyn Kelly on
FOX News or
whoever the target of the day
is.
And if he can do that, then I
think Hillary
Clinton has got something to
worry about in
November if it's a Trump-Clinton
matchup.
As a matter of fact, I think
she's got something
to worry about no matter what.
Somebody, a
friend of mine likened this
race, a presidential
race to being in a boxing match.
If you're fighting another
professional boxer,
you kind of know where the
punches are coming
from. But if you're fighting
somebody who
is not a traditional boxer, a
punch can come
from anywhere and lay you out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is that how you
see it?
SUSAN PAGE: I think Trump's
biggest problem,
though, is that about four in 10
Republican
primary voters say, if he's the
nominee against
Hillary Clinton, they will look
-- they will
seriously consider a third-party
candidate.
And if that's the race we have,
if it's Trump
vs. Clinton, don't you think we
will have
a third-party candidate of some
sort? So,
I think the first task Trump has
to do is
to reach out a bridge to these
Republican
voters before he can have a hope
of reaching
out to the independent voters
who will determine
the general election.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So much to
contemplate in the
coming weeks.
Susan Page, Reid Wilson, thank
you both.
REID WILSON: Thanks a lot.
SUSAN PAGE: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: A sincere, if
misguided, young
soldier, or a deserter and even
a traitor?
Bowe Bergdahl, the Army sergeant
who walked
off his post in June 2009, now
faces court-martial
on charges of desertion and
endangering troops.
Still unclear, what motivated
Bergdahl to
leave his comrades.
The "PBS NewsHour" and The New
York Times
were recently provided with the
transcript
of Bergdahl's only interview
with the Army's
top investigating officer, in
which the sergeant
lays out what made him do it.
Jeffrey Brown has the exclusive
details.
JEFFREY BROWN: May 31, 2014.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
This morning, I called Bob and
Jani Bergdahl,
and told them that, after nearly
five years
in captivity, their son Bowe is
coming home.
JEFFREY BROWN: Army Sergeant
Bowe Bergdahl's
release came after the U.S.
agreed to free
five Taliban leaders being held
at Guantanamo
Bay. To some, the announcement
brought joy
and relief. But others,
including soldiers
who served in his unit, saw
something different.
JOSH KORDER, Former U.S. Army
Sergeant: It's
very frustrating to me to see
Bergdahl's family
on the TV being shown to
everyone. He's, at
best, a deserter and, at worst,
a traitor.
JEFFREY BROWN: Five years
earlier, Bergdahl
had served at a remote outpost
called Mest
Malak in Southeastern
Afghanistan. This is
one of the post's observation
points on the
top of a hill.
And these are the last known
pictures of Bergdahl
in the days before he walked off
the post.
He was captured by the Taliban
the day after
he left.
SGT. BOWE BERGDAHL, U.S. Army:
All's I was
seeing was basically leadership
failure.
JEFFREY BROWN: Bergdahl had told
the podcast
"Serial" that leadership
problems were endangering
his unit, and that he planned to
hike to another
post to alert a senior Army
commander.
SGT. BOWE BERGDAHL: I was fully
confident
that when somebody actually took
a look at
the situation, and when people
started investigating
the situation, that people would
understand
that I was right.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now there's more
insight into
Bergdahl's thinking. It comes in
a transcript
provided exclusively to the
"NewsHour" and
The New York Times by his
attorney from an
interview Bergdahl gave two
months after his
release to the Army's senior
investigating
officer.
In it, he speaks of concerns he
had with immediate
commanders from the very
beginning of his
enlistment.
Here, for example, in a passage
read by a
"NewsHour" producer, he
described a platoon
inspection before his deployment
to Afghanistan.
PRODUCER: "The sergeant major
opens with:
'I know you all joined because
you want to
rape, pillage, and kill. That's
why I joined.
However, you need to think about
counterinsurgency.'
I was a little taken aback by
it, because
that's not why I joined."
JEFFREY BROWN: Bergdahl's lead
attorney, Eugene
Fidell, spoke to the
"NewsHour"'s Dan Sagalyn:
EUGENE FIDELL, Attorney for Bowe
Bergdahl:
He takes things literally that
are said to
him. He came into the Army with
some ideals,
and he had a notion of what the
Army was about
and what the environment that he
was going
to be in with was going to be
like. And it
sounds to me like he was quite
surprised to
have this kind of guidance.
JEFFREY BROWN: Elsewhere in the
transcript,
Bergdahl talked of his first
mission in Afghanistan,
a night patrol in which his job
was to look
for explosive devices. One of
his commanders,
he told the Army investigator,
yelled at him
to speed up the search.
PRODUCER: "Hurry up goes against
the common
sense. He was just saying,
there's a possible
mine field in front of you.
Hurry up and go
hit a mine. That's amazing
coming from the
person sitting back in the car
or in the truck.
You're telling me to hurry up in
situations
I shouldn't be hurrying. That
was my first
mission. That was my first
experience in Afghanistan.
And that basically continued."
EUGENE FIDELL: I think that
Sergeant Bergdahl
expected that his command, that
his superiors
in the chain of command would be
attentive
to his personal safety and the
personal safety
of other members of the unit.
And the kind of instruction or
reaction that
he got from a fellow soldier in
that particular
incident displayed an
indifference to personnel
safety.
JEFFREY BROWN: Later, Bergdahl
spoke of the
possibility he'd be sent on a
suicide mission.
It was around this point that he
decided to
leave the base.
PRODUCER: "What could happen is
this battalion
commander could see us, my
platoon, as this
stain on his reputation. Now,
sending us on
a suicide mission wouldn't be
the first in
military history. Somebody doing
-- somebody
giving out an order on personal
agendas or
off personal grievances, it is
not going to
be a first in military history."
EUGENE FIDELL: Feeling that
there was no alternative
way to get his concerns about
circumstances
in the unit and the lack of
leadership in
the unit, Sergeant Bergdahl
concluded that
he had to get to a higher
echelon. His view
was that the way to do that was
to walk over
land.
JEFFREY BROWN: Nonsense, says
former Army
lawyer Lieutenant Colonel
Geoffrey Corn.
LT. COL. MD-BO /GEOFFREY CORN
(RET.), Former
Army Lawyer: His concerns over
the unit originated
long before he ended up on that
combat outpost.
So what did he do about it? Did
he talk to
the chaplain? Did he go see the
inspector
general? Did he try and see any
of the superior
officers in the chain of
command?
Those are all options that a
soldier has.
Is it possible there were
decisions or statements
where we say, that might have
been a little
bit cavalier or maybe a
subordinate would
have been concerned about what
they were being
asked to do? Of course. This is
the nature
of the military. It's the nature
of combat
operations.
JEFFREY BROWN: Last July, an
Army forensic
psychiatrist issued a report
diagnosing Bergdahl
with schizotypal personality
disorder, a condition
marked by distorted perceptions,
eccentric
behavior, and magical thinking.
Bergdahl's attorney adds that
his client's
problems were known earlier,
when he was discharged
from the Coast Guard, and that
he shouldn't
have been allowed to enlist in
the Army.
EUGENE FIDELL: Sergeant Bergdahl
was released
prematurely from U.S. Coast
Guard boot camp
at Cape May, New Jersey, because
of a psychological
or psychiatric incident. That,
in turn, required
him to get a waiver in order to
be enlisted
into the Army. For reasons I'm
unable to explain,
he was given that waiver. The
Army has said,
well, we think it was an OK
thing to do. That
will be an issue at the trial.
JEFFREY BROWN: Geoffrey Corn
says Bergdahl's
mental state could be a relevant
factor in
the later part of the
court-martial.
LT. COL. GEOFFREY CORN: I think
it would be
a consideration in sentencing,
but it's no
surprise that, when the military
is trying
to fill the ranks in an
all-volunteer force
in a time where it's hard to
bring in the
number of recruits they need,
that they accept
greater risk with the people
they bring in,
although I do find it somewhat
ironic that,
based on public information that
we have seen,
that members of his unit thought
that, up
to this point, he was a fairly
good soldier.
JEFFREY BROWN: In fact, the
results of the
Bergdahl investigation produced
a dramatic
split within top Army ranks. The
senior Army
investigator, Lieutenant General
Kenneth Dahl,
recommended that Bergdahl not
face prison
time, saying it would be --
quote -- "inappropriate."
But in December, a higher
official, General
Robert Abrams, ruled that a
court-martial
should go ahead. The trial is
tentatively
scheduled to start in August. If
convicted
of all charges, Bergdahl could
face life imprisonment.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown.
GWEN IFILL: You can read more
about what else
Bergdahl told the senior Army
investigating
officer, including the full
transcript itself.
All that is on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
officer, including the full
transcript itself.
All that is on our home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
We will be back in just a
moment.
But, first, take this time to
hear from your
local PBS station. It's a chance
to offer
your support, which helps keep
programs like
ours on the air.
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: A
new survey finds that most
customers who bother
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: A
new survey finds that most
customers who bother
to call their credit card
company about a
late fee succeed in having it
reversed, and,
to call their credit card
company about a
late fee succeed in having it
reversed, and,
in many cases, they have even
negotiated a
lower interest rate. But, the
study finds,
in many cases, they have even
negotiated a
lower interest rate. But, the
study finds,
it depends on who you are.
See how results can vary by age
and race on
our home page. That's
PBS.org/NewsHour.
See how results can vary by age
and race on
our home page. That's
PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday: a report from our
Making Sense
series. As college basketball
kicks off March
On Thursday: a report from our
Making Sense
series. As college basketball
kicks off March
Madness, should schools
compensate athletes?
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.